
=head1 NAME

debconf-updatepo - update PO files about debconf templates

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<debconf-updatepo>
[B<-v>] [B<-h>]
[B<--podir=I<DIR>>]
[B<--skip-pot>]
[B<--skip-merge>]
[B<--msgid-bugs-address=I<EMAIL>>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program reads F<po/POTFILES.in> to determine which master files
need to be processed, then extracts new gettext strings into  F<po/templates.pot>
and updates all F<po/*.po> files.  This script can be called either
in the top-level directory, or in the F<debian> or F<debian/po>
subdirectories.  It is run by developer and/or translator to update
PO files when the English text is modified in F<templates> files.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Display a usage summary and exit.

=item B<-v>, B<--verbose>

Process in verbose mode.

=item B<--podir=I<DIR>>

Set directory for PO files.  By default PO files are searched
in F<debian/po>, F<po> and F<../po> directories in that order.

=item B<--skip-pot>

Do not generate a new F<po/templates.pot> file.

=item B<--skip-merge>

Do not merge existing PO files with F<po/templates.pot>.

=item B<--msgid-bugs-address=I<EMAIL>>

Set the email address that will be specified in the POT's
Report-Msgid-Bugs-To field.

By default, this field is set to <package>@package.debian.org.

It is intended for the maintainers of Debian based distributions, and
should be used in the following cases:

=over

=item o

The package is not present in Debian (and thus the
<package>@packages.debian.org address does not exist).

=item o

The maintainer made significant changes in the debconf templates (or added
templates to a Debian package without templates), and does not want to
bother the Debian maintainer with bug reports that won't be relevant for
the Debian maintainer.

=back

The default address is preferred to avoid corrections in the Debian based
distribution without a notification to the Debian maintainer.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<debconf-gettextize(1)>,
L<po2debconf(1)>,
L<podebconf-report-po(1)>,
L<po-debconf(7)>.

=head1 AUTHOR

  Denis Barbier <barbier@linuxfr.org>

